More specifically, there are a variety
of different approaches that people
use to address this causality issue.
Kind of arrayed them here on a chart.
Because there's a real tradeoff here,
I think, between difficulty and
effectiveness.
The things where we really think, yep.
We absolutely are convinced that
this is what's driving performance.
Tend to be quite hard to do.
There are a lot of easier things that give
us more comfort, but can't be definitive.
And so the simplest thing, if we're
using some sort of regression framework,
is this idea of measuring and
controlling the omitted variables.
If we believe that there's
some other factor,
that's driving our predictor,
that's a potential omitted variable.
If we can include that in our
regressions and control for it, or
if we can make sure that people,
the high and the low performers,
have same levels of that omitted variable.
Then we can say,
no that's not what's going on.
And so that's your first strategy.
Kind of a variant of that, is trying
to hold the person constant, and so
sometimes looking at changes in
performance of the same individual before
and after some kind of intervention,
training or
something like that, can be a way to
avoid a lot of these omitted variables.
It's not perfect because as we
saw in the example, of kind of
people improving in training because it's
people are experiencing a dip who go in.
There are also some things,
even with the same person,
but change at the same
time as our intervention.
But this is kind of
the first thing that we do.
The reason why this doesn't always work
is that there are a lot of things that we
can't measure with the precision
that we would like to.
And so
a lot of the early work on this was done
looking at the question of
the value of education, you know?
How much money do we get from
each extra year of education.
And people are always worried about.
Well, is that driven by the effect
of what we're learning, or
is that driven by smarter
people getting more education.
Obviously, as a PhD, I'm deeply
wedded to that second explanation.
The question was can we control for
ability?
Obviously, you can throw in
things like GPA and so on, but
we always know GPA and grades are not
the same thing as being smart.
And so
a big challenge was always how do we
really feel comfortable that
we have measured ability.
Because there's always gonna be a lot of
things that you haven't measured, and
that's gonna compromise this approach.
The second thing that you can
do that's on the easier side is
What's evidence that you can
use to rule out alternatives?
If you think there's another reason why
you might be seeing the same pattern,
what can you do to address this?
So I talked a little earlier about some
work that I did where I was trying to
understand whether promotion or hiring was
more likely to lead to high performance.
One of the challenges with that work is I
was using performance evaluations and so
I find that people who
are promoted perform more highly.
Well, couldn't that just be that
their evaluation's more biased?
The man just know them better,
they like them better they
give them better evaluations.
It's hard to rule that out.
One thing that I could look at,
is at least say.
Well, sometimes these evaluations
are more objective and
sometimes they are more subjective.
So, you're going to be more
objective when you're thinking about
evaluations that are tied to results.
Did they achieve results and
less objective when you're
thinking about competence.
They're going to be more objective
when your looking at a job like sales,
with this hard number
at the end of the year.
Less objective when you're looking
at something like advisory business.
And so what I did was I at least compared
what the effects look like when they're
more objective versus less objective.
The effects were stronger on
measures that were more objective,
which gave me some comfort
that this wasn't a bias story.
So always think about, okay, what other
things do those alternative explanations
suggest and can I find evidence for
them in the data is another way to at
least get some comfort around causality.
Ultimately, to really feel confident here,
what you need is something that
looks more like an experiment.
In an experiment what we do is randomly
assign people to a treatment condition and
then we have controls.
We compare the difference between them.
One way to do this, is look for
places where the experiment has
already been done with yes.
So people describe this
as natural experiments.
Weather conditions under which
randomly assigned to the treatment or
is there an assignment to getting
treatment has nothing to do
with performance, a famous example
of this in a different setting.
Again, this is a question
people are interested in.
How much does education affect earnings?
Well, it turned out,
during the Vietnam War in the U.S.,
there was conscription and
there was a draft, and
how likely you were to be drafted
depended on a lottery number.
That you've got.
One way to get out of military service
was through going to university.
And so
depending on the draft number people got,
they were more versus less likely
to actually go to university.
And so people have just been
randomly assigned a higher versus
lower probability of going to university.
And this was used to try and
estimate, okay,
if they're being randomly assigned this,
then we have more confidence that we can
get a sense of what the effect of
going to university on pay is.
Because we know there is some component
of this that has nothing to do
with our underlying ability,
ability to learn, or anything like that.
And so looking for those kinds of trials,
those natural experiments where we know
something is being randomly assigned,
Is a great way to be more
confident about causality.
The big challenge here, obviously,
is you need to be lucky.
Not everything is randomly assigned.
Chances are your training was
not randomly assigned and
if it isn't,
you cannot use this kind of approach.
In that case,
what you can do is conduct an experiment.
If this is something that matters enough
for you then persuade people that you want
to randomly assign training,
and see what the impact is.
And that way you really can have
a decent control and treatment group.
You can even make sure that those groups
are really balanced in terms of some of
the other characteristics of individuals
that you think might effect the outcome.
This is kind of the gold standards.
When we do medical trials,
we really wanna know the answer,
it's the right thing to do.
Obviously, the challenge here
is it's expensive, right?
You need to persuade people
to let you do the experiment.
It's gonna take you time
to set up the experiment.
It's gonna take time to run in
a way that often archival data,
it's all already there, okay?
And so that's the tradeoff here.
But always something that you
kind of want to think about
as you look at these studies is why am
I seeing the results that I'm seeing?
And if this really matters, what can I do
to be absolutely sure that my predictor
variable is driving this performance
in the way I think it is?
How much am I willing to
invest in finding that out?